PROFILE
Professor Gina Neff is a Senior Research Fellow and Associate Professor at the Oxford Internet Institute and the Department of Sociology at the University of Oxford. She studies the future of work in data-rich environments. Professor Neff leads a new multinational comparative research project on the effects of the adoption of AI across multiple industries. She is the author of Venture Labor (MIT Press, 2012), which won the 2013 American Sociological Association Communication and Information Technologies Best Book Award; and with Dawn Nafus Self-Tracking (MIT Press, 2016). Her writing for the general public has appeared in Wired, Slate and The Atlantic, among other outlets. She holds a Ph.D. in sociology from Columbia University, where she remains a faculty affiliate at the Center on Organizational Innovation, and she serves as a strategic advisor on the social impact of AI for the Women’s Forum.
Areas of Interest for Doctoral Supervision
Big data, cultural industries, innovation, labour, social media, organisation
Research interests
Innovation, work, organisations, culture, communication, theory, qualitative methods, critical data studies, science and technology studies.
Position held at the OII
Director of DPhil programme, January 2017 –
Senior Research Fellow, July 2016 –
Associate Professor, July 2016 – Profile
Research
Publications
Teaching
Videos
Events
Blog
Press
Integrity
RESEARCH
Current projects
The Futures for Online Consumption
Participants: Professor Gina Neff, Blake DiCosola
How might the future of consumption change how we track and monitor ourselves? This project will test different strategies for helping people make healthier choices in online food shopping.
The A-Z of AI
Participants: Professor Gina Neff, James Ward IV, Margaret McGrath, Blake Dicosola, Nayana Prakash
The A-Z of AI is an interactive guide that allows anyone who is curious about AI to develop a baseline understanding of the technology.
AI & Data Diversity
Participants: Professor Gina Neff
This project seeks to advance public understanding of data diversity and the everyday decisions around AI and technology innovation. This will help build better technologies and strengthen the science on diversity in technology-led growth.
Data Work: Collaboration, Sense Making and the Possible Futures for Work
Participants: Professor Gina Neff
How do new types of data change workplace practices?
Past projects
Reconfiguring Citizen Participation in Cybersecurity
Participants: Julia Slupska, Professor Gina Neff
Reconfigure is a feminist cybersecurity project that uses community-based participatory methods and feminist approaches to reconfigure cybersecurity research and build public capacity for data privacy and action.