Research Interests
My research focuses more on different aspects of information security; security in big data, security in IoT systems, network security, fog and cloud security, technologies that support GDPR, AI in security and malware detection. Please contact me if you think I can help you for your PhD.
Vision Statement
I like professional career, high quality research and teaching. I have a good feel when I share my experience with students about living in several countries for my education and career. I have seen different cultures and educational systems. I enjoy when I see students use my advice and they are successful. I talk with them about time management, stress management, wellbeing and other abilities that help them to be successful.
Biography
I wrote my first computer program in 1990 before I start my education in Bachelor of Software Engineering. I started programming with COBOL on Unix, then FORTRAN, Pascal, Visual Basic, C++, and the last systems were developed by Visual C#, .Net, Ajax technology and SQL by me. I was working in a company as a system analyser, designer, and developer for fifteen years. Then I decided to change my career to academic (research and teaching) due to my interest. To materialize this dream, I immigrated to Malaysia, and started my PhD in faculty of Computer Science in University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur. I went South Africa immediately after my PhD and I started to work with Rossouw Von Solms who built an unforgettable period in my life in Centre for Research in Information and Cyber Security (CRICS), Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University. I worked on human aspects of cyber security in this centre, the outputs of my research were published in several prominent journals in this domain such as Computer and Security, Computer in Human Behavior, IEEE journals and so on. I should thank Steve Furnell, a professor in Plymouth University who always helps me for my research and career. I finished my Postdoctoral in South Africa successfully and I started to work in Cyber Security Centre, University of Warwick with a well-known professor – Carsten Maple – on security in IoT systems (PETRAS Project) for about three years. I was impact champion for six months, and due to my interest I focused on information security and privacy protection in IoT systems. I supervised two PhD students in University of Warwick and many master students. I joined School of Computing, Electronics and Mathematics, University of Coventry as a lecturer, But research is my entertainment, I enjoy research, and is an inseparable part of my job for ever.
Teaching:
Information Security Management (Lectures & Labs)
Digital Security Risk and Audit Management (Lectures & Labs)
Cloud Security and Business Continuity (Labs)
Operating System Security (Labs)
Software Development (Lectures & Labs)